# An Overview of the workflows / user experience (UX) of various roles regarding the use of VoteTracker+

## 1) How does an end voter interact with VoteTacker+?

## 1.1) Overview of an in-person voter physically casting a ballot

1) The voter identifies themself to an election official at the voter intake station
2) The election official verifies their identity and registration status
3) The election official gives the voter an address correct blank ballot
4) The voter proceeds to a private location to complete as much of the ballot as desired
5) The voter proceeds to a second semi private self adjudication /outtake location.  Self-adjudication is when the voter self adjudicates the digital interpretation of the physical markings on the ballot by elf verifying the generated [CVRs](https://pages.nist.gov/ElectionGlossary/#cast-vote-record).  Outtake is when the election officials records the voter as having voted and completed voting.  Note that the election official cannot see the screen of the self-adjudicating scanner but can a have safe and respectful direct conversation with the voter and offer assistance.
    1) The voter privately inserts their ballot into a VTP scanner
    2) The scanner displays the Cast Vote Records for all the contests on the ballot.  Blank contests are indicated as such (legitimate [undervotes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undervote)).
    3) If the interpreted CVRs are not to the liking of the voter, the voter can reject the ballot.  If rejected, the ballot is returned to the voter.  With the ballot selections covered but with the ballot header exposed, the voter shows the ballot header to the self-adjudication/outtake election official, who will supply a new and correct blank ballot.  The current completed ballot is then shredded in the presence of both the voter and the election official, and the voter returns to the private voting location to try again.
    4) If the interpreted CVRs are to the liking of the voter, the voter accepts the CVRs and the ballot is officially accepted.  An anonymized ballot check is printed and a voter row number is privately shown to the voter.
6) The election official records the outtake and the voter departs the voting area.

Note - the above does not include _digest swapping attacks_ mitigation which as of this writing would include TOTP passcodes generated by VTP as part of the CVR payload that the user can independently verify either via their own smart device or by an election official supplied dedicated mini smart device (not a cell phone) if a voter so chooses.   The 2FA step prevents the digest swapping in the case of a compromised VTP scanner or VTP integrated voting center.  Such mitigation results in an optional extra UX step by voters who choose to do so.

## 1.2) Absentee ballot and Vote-by-mail ballot identification

1) The voter successfully receives the absentee or vote-by-mail ballot from their election officials
2) The voter fills in the ballot as much as desired
3) If so configured by election officials, the voter may be able to indicate that they wish to receive their ballot check in the mail or by some other delivery mechanism.  The voter's row number cannot be mailed, emailed, or passed to the voter as that would create a distinct market for selling and buying votes.
4) The voter mails or delivers the absentee/vote-by-mail ballot to their election officials
5) Depending on what has be configured and requested, the voter may eventually receive their ballot check.
6) If the voter supplied a mail-in public key and if election officials support it, the voter can visit an election official in the designated locations (nominally town hall), properly identify themselves, and privately receive in a secure manner (similar to in-person voting) their encrypted index offset.  With the matching private key, the encrypted key can be decoded so that the voter can inspect the actual CVR's of their ballot in the official election tallies.

## 1.3) Accessibility Notes

For those voters who have accessibility issues, an election official or personal helper can accompany the voter through the in-person or remote voting experience.

An additional option is that election officials have the option of providing an independent ballot marking station where instead of the voter physically marking a ballot, the voter privately marks a touch screen and prints an accurately marked ballot.  In this case the voter does not receive a physical blank ballot when first identifying themselves to election officials.

## 1.4) Once all the polls close, the voter can inspect their specific electronic ballot

Once all the polls close, readonly clones of the official VTP election repositories are made publicly available.  Voters with a voter check can either manually enter contest public keys or scan the entire check.  Either way, they can verify all 100 sets of contest checks against the official repos.  As election officials push updates to their official election repos, the readonly clones are updated as the pull requests are validated and merged in.  As such, some voters will have to wait until their ballot CVRs are successfully pushed.

Alternatively, the voter can download copies of the readonly repositories and perform the same queries offline.

If the voter remembers their specific offset into their specific ballot check, then can inspect their actual CVRs.

## 1.5) Once all the polls close, voters can inspect the VTP voter_ID repositories - VoteTracker+ 2.0 functionality only

Once all the polls close, voters can also download/clone copies of the readonly voter-id repositories.  These are separate git repositories that solely record voter name and address 100% independently from the ballot repositories.

Note that voter id rolls are already publicly available.  However, most voters do not have easy access to them, which is both a postive and a negative.  With regards to the trustworthiness of an election, supporting easy access to the VTP filtered voter id data allows voter in real time to inspect the voter id information for their neighborhood as well as neighborhoods where they may suspect voter id fraud.  By make the data available, false narratives and mis information can be more quickly and more believably be corrected.

### 1.5.1) WIP/WITSEC Notes

VTP does not directly impact [WPP/WITSEC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Federal_Witness_Protection_Program) programs since at the federal level the voter's name has already been changed.  State level WITSEC programs will work as well as they do given however the state identifies individuals at the voting center via their own WITSEC programs.

Note that election officials can optionally work with federal or state level WITSEC programs to validate that a participant has not voted twice using their multiple IDs via VoteTracker+ 2.0 functionality.

## 1.6) Once all the polls close, the voter can perform all the ballot tallies

Since the VTP repositories, a.k.a. the election public ledgers, also pre contain all the tally algorithms for all contests for all ballots, the voter can perform their own tally on their own device.  Since the ledger is cryptographically sealed, all legitimate copies of the ledger are known to be identical VTP software and CVR wise.

## 1.7) The voter can tell if their ballot is removed from the tally

If election officials decide to remove a ballot or a set of ballots from the election, for example under a court order or some other adjudication, the election officials will either:

### 1.7.1) Rescan the voting center ballots, nullifying the previous scans

By rescanning all the ballots from a voting center, the original digests are removed from the public ledger.  This will defunct the ballot checks that the voters received in person, allowing the voters to know that a rescan has occurred.

### 1.7.2) Scan the nullified ballots in a special VTP scanner - VoteTracker+ 2.0 functionality only

If a small portion of the ballots are to be voided and if the election officials have adopted VoteTracker+ 2.0 functionality, then the paper ballots have been marked with a digest also added to the digital scans.  This digest contains references to the individual contest digests.  So by nullifying a specific ballot, specific contests will be nullified.  This in turn will be revealed to all those voters who ballot checks contain the nullified contest regardless if it is theirs.  Voters can then privately contact election officials and question the nullification of their ballot check.

## 2) How does an election official interact with VoteTacker+?

The election official interactions with VTP elections will be different depending on the phase of the election, whether it is pre, during/active, or post election.  Here pre-election workflows refer to all the election official workflows and activities prior to the first scan/entry/count of the first ballot anywhere or by any means.  The pre-election phase ends when the first ballot somewhere is scanned/entered/counted.  The 'during' or 'active' election phase is when ballots are being scanned/entered/counted.  NIST implies this phase starts when the first [voting session](https://pages.nist.gov/ElectionGlossary/#voting-session) regardless if the ballot is cast as in person, absentee, early voting, or vote-by-mail.  The active election phase ends when _all the polls close_.  _All the polls close_ is when it is no longer possible to cast a new ballot anywhere again regardless of the type of voting session (in-person, early, absentee, by mail, etc).  This excludes ballots that have already been _accepted_ and not yet scanned/entered/counted.  Note that the specific and detailed definition of _accepted_ can vary from state to state.

## 2.1) Pre-election workflows

When an election is initiated, the root election GGO will fork the VTP product repositories.  If there was a previous VTP election, the git changes of that prior election can be merged into the new fork, perhaps significantly reducing the costs of configuring the new election.

The election officials across the GGOs of the election will work both independently on their own configuration as well as with the other GGOs.  All the changes will git push into the VTP election repos for this specific election and be pulled back down by the GGOs.  As per the "../tech/github-devsecops-overview.md" overview there is an always on CI/CD pipeline vetting all pushed changes before a change can be merged into the VTP root level repositories and pulled by other GGOs.  Note - similar to any software development project using git, GGOs can freely share changes directly between themselves if they so choose.  But regardless of that level a sharing, all changes need to pass the CI/CD pipeline before merging into the root repositories.

A primary design point of VTP is the efficacy of the CI/CD pipeline that are an integral part of VTP.  Changes can be vetted in minimal time and thus with minimal cost, including changes to the GGO's specific ballot sections.  The CI/CD pipeline includes tests to make sure the correct addresses are receiving the correct contests.

At some point the complete blank ballot is declared both accurate and complete.  Note that all changes to the ballot have authors and all changes are included in the full public ledger.  Note that VTP can print address specific ballots on demand as well as making available soft copies that any voter can view beforehand.

## 2.2) Vote-by-Mail and other pre-election workflows

Vote-by-mail, absentee, and early voting workflows can commence once the ballot is finalized.  Scanning/entering/counting ballots will transition the VTP election phase from pre-election to active-election.

In vote-by-mail and absentee, depending on how the precinct is handling vote-by-mail and absentee, the ballots may be created in soft form and emailed/digitally delivered or printed as hardcopy and physically posted.

If the precinct is supporting early voting in person, then an election day workflow is supported in a physical voting center.  As with election day in-person voting, a ballot check will not be available until a sufficient number of people have voted so to be able to sufficiently randomize the public keys.

## 2.3) Election day workflows

On election day in a voting center, the election official workflows match the in-person voter workflow described in section 1.1 above.  Specifically:

1) An election official asks the voter to identity themselves
2) An election official verifies their identity and registration status
3) An election official gives the voter an address specific blank ballot
4) An election official directs/assists the voter to a private location to fill in their ballot
5) An election official directs/assists the voter to a semi private VTP scanner.  The election observes from a distance:
    1) Observes the voter privately inserting their ballot into a VTP scanner
    2) Observer the voter accept/reject the ballot.  Note that the election cannot tell at this whether the ballot was accepted or rejected.
    3) Depending on the VTP configuration for this voting center, the election official may:
       1) Assist the voter in destroying their current ballot and obtaining a new ballot if they rejected their current ballot
       2) Assist the voter in returning to a private location to correct their ballot
       3) Assist the voter to checking out from the voting center if their ballot was accepted by the VTP scanner.  The voter may or may not have decided to receive a ballot check.
6) Optional step - the voter proceeds to a second checkout voter ID location to re-identify themselves to another election official
7) Optional step - an election official may direct/assist the voter to a VTP ballot verifier scanner outside the primary voting area.  This is where the voter can verify prior to leaving the voting center that their ballot has been entered into the tally and is now part of the VTP ledger.

## 2.4) Post-election day workflows

Once all the polls close, election officials proceed with their post election day activities.  With a VTP election, this will include various audits as well as verifying that all the ballots have been pushed from all the VTP scanners to the VTP git server handling the voter center.  Ultimately the VTP git server changes will need to be pushed to the VTP election remote servers, a pull request created following the various authentication, authorization, and security protocols.  Once the pull request has been merged, it will be available from the VTP root servers.

Note - the public never accesses the VTP root servers - the public only can access the readonly clones of the secured VTP election servers.

Note - the update the VTP election servers by the voting center election officials can occur by several different means, either electronically or manually by actual delivery of the VTP server or a copy of the VTP data.

## 3) End-to-End Validation (E2EV) Audits

E2EV audits can occur almost at any time, but primarily and should occur after all the polls close so to not interrupt election officials and not require audits of the auditors (since in that case they would then be part of the election and subject to auditing as well).  Note that nominally and for reasons of transparency and trust, VTP only audits occur on the public readonly copies of the data as that is the data that the public will also be scrutinizing.  Because of the low latency of the VTP solution, VTP based audits, whether they concern the ballots or the recorded voter IDs, can be performed by anyone.

The VTP only audits are different than paper audits that can/should also occur.  The paper based audits can be done either by election officials or by qualified 3rd party independent teams.  Note that the VTP scanner will securely mark the paper ballot and associate it with its digital scan.  The mark is created in an anonymous and cryptographic manner such that given a paper ballot, one can identify the associated contest CVRs.  Thus if a specific ballot or a set of ballots are deemed to be illegitimate, they can be removed by an election official by adding an additional git commit to the associated VTP repository.  As with all git commits, the commit must be PGP signed, pushed, pull requested, approved, and merged.

An important aspect regarding this step is that the voter whose ballot has been rejected needs to be able to know this and be given the opportunity to challenge its removal if they so choose.  Note that the ballot checks have been cryptographically created in such a way that one needs direct access to a set of operational private keys specifically generated for the specific election.  These keys, associated with but in addition to the [CA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_authority) chain created for this election, are distributed in a certain way to competing and separate parties such that voters and other 3rd parties cannot create legitimate ballot checks.

Given the anonymous nature of a VTP election, E2EV procedures will not be able to decode or identify ballot owners without a collusion between a super majority of the voters, election officials, and auditors.  That is, if most everyone is colluding to hold an illegitimate election, then an illegitimate election can occur.

