Public voting and electronic election systems are in a multifaceted and complex domain, and one that does NOT have significant market potential.  It can take years to certify an electronic election system where the security threats change by the minute.  The domain has significant technical, business, and political risks.  All this contributes to the challenges as well as the excitement of a VOTES solution.

TECHNICAL RISKS include a minimum of three basic issues:

1) The design and implementation of the public repositories - the 'data at rest' domain.  This is the technology of how the full ledger Merkle tree implementation handles blank and cast ballots, GGOs (geographical/geopolitical overlays), tally algorithms, private and public keys, and the various election workflows.  This domains focuses on the security, integrity, and viability of the 'data at rest'.

2) The design and implementation of the certificate authorities and the security models surrounding the authentication and encryption of data both at rest and in transit.  This concerns both the 'data at rest' as well as the operational aspects of running the actual election pre election day, on the election day, and post election day.

3) The operational aspects of running the election pre, during, and post election day.  One likely operational implementation of VOTES is SaaS based which includes all things operational, including security during the election itself.  Note that if an existing vendor incorporates VOTES, then that vendor's existing solution in this space could be leveraged.  If VOTES wins a RFP solo, then the VOTES SaaS solution would solve this problem.

BUSINESS RISKS are significant since a VOTES implementation is purchased either directly by a state or a city to run an election, or the VOTES technology is licensed by an existing election system vendor to incorporate into existing election systems.  Neither are high volume or high margin business opportunities.  There is a business opportunity once VOTES can be commoditized at the SaaS cloud level, but that is NOT what this kickstarter campaign is targeting.  This campaign is targeting the initial step of getting VOTES into the RFP process for a city or state.  Once in the RFP process, that funding will bring a VOTES instance into a live trial.  Yes the final business target is world-wide, bringing transparent, secure, and fast elections to all countries, not just the United States.  And that final business target does have market potential, but again this is NOT what this kickstarter campaign is targeting.  Ultimately VOTES is an international effort to support all public and democratic voting.

Significant POLITICAL RISKS are also present.  Each state has different rules and restrictions concerning voting procedures.  Though VOTES is designed out of the box to handle such customizations, there is risk that a state may adopt some fundamental restriction that prohibits VOTES from being a possible solution.  For example, Germany restricts electronic voting systems to be explainable and transparent to the average voter.  By design we believe VOTES complies with such requirements being 100% open source with a simple voter UX and description, but we are not the German courts.  The implementation is completely open source with a Git based CI open source development and delivery model.

Also, though VOTES is NOT a voter identification system, running a VOTES election will record the names and addresses of all the voters.  Though this directly supports the transparency and hence trust in the election, some may see this as an additional invasion of voter privacy.  Though all US based voter-id data is publicly available today, the aggregation of all the voter-id data across the entire electorate in one place may be seen as an additional security risk.  This tension between voter-id transparency and privacy is fundamental to public elections.  VOTES shares this information but in a controlled manner.  Unlike past attempts to aggregate this data, VOTES inherently limits the voter-id data to just the name and address, alleviating the risk of additional personal voter information from being publicly shared.  VOTES allows election officials to maintain their own voter-id information with as much additional information necessary to satisfy their voter identification requirements comfortably separate from VOTES.  For public elections with transparent voter-id rolls it is this complete separation that maximizes voter-id privacy.

The VOTES team constantly re-evaluates known and potential risks, both political and technical.  The election system domain is multifaceted and constantly evolving, and in general is ripe for risk and reward.
