# VOTES

A Verifiable Open Technology Election System

# 1) Overview of VOTES

VOTES is a distributed, open-source project aimed at increasing the security, accuracy, and trustworthiness of paper ballot elections by:
- giving cryptographically anonymized ballot receipts back to the voter
- providing each voter full access to all the anonymous ballot data and election software
- allowing each voter to individually execute the tally and inspect voter rolls

It is an [election](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Election) and [voting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voting) framework deliverable as either an on premise or [SaaS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_as_a_service) solution.  Being part framework, VOTES includes the complete software provenance of all the software and ballot data used in and generated by an election.  Being part solution, VOTES is directly usable in any public or private election while also being quite customizable.  Each software change, either code or data, is authenticated and tracked and automatically run through a fully automated DevSecOps CI/CD pipeline.

VOTES allows the quick and easy adoption of the best agile based DevSecOps practices leading up to an actual election, including directly supporting post election day activities.

# 2) Basic Voter In-place Experience (UX)

From the voter's point of view, VOTES is primarily a backoffice implementation that generates cryptographic metadata associated with each Cast Vote Record for storing, retrieving, inspecting, and tallying the CVRs.  As such, the voter's current in-place voting experience changes in subtle but significant ways.  The following describes these changes in more or less chronological order from current  in-place voting experiences.

The first change a voter will notice will be that the paper ballot scanning device contains display that privately reveals to the user the CVR itself.  This offers the voter the opportunity to void their physical paper ballot and receive a new blank ballot if they believe their CVR is incorrect.  A voter is free to ignore this step and submit their ballot regardless.

The second change is that once submitted, the voter can optionally receive a ballot receipt.  The receipt is cryptographically anonymized and actually contains 100 rowa of ballot worth of micro receipts, a separate micro receipt for each contest/question on the ballot.  In addition to the printed page, the voter also privately receives an offset into the table of micro receipts indicating which specific row is their specific ballot.  There is no way a third party can determine which row is the voters.  However, it is up to the voter to remember their specific row from this point on.

The third change is that prior to leaving the election controlled space of the voting center, the voter can place their voter sheet on a second independent VOTES scanner that will inspect their receipt and validate the accuracy of the receipt data against the live local VOTES ballot Merkle tree.  This would be the initial validation to the voter that their blessed CVR is contained in what will end up to be the official election results.

The last significant change comes after all the polls close.  Once all the polls close, the election officials will make read-only copies of the VOTES Merkle tree available for download and inspection via standard GitHub servers.  Voters will be able to download the Git repos, which includes the software to tally all the contexts and validate individual ballot receipts, including the voter's.  This offers the voter to forever validate that their blessed CVR is contained in the election and that it has been counted correctly and that the entire election tally of each context has been executed correctly.

In addition, with the voter rolls also available by the same GitHub servers, voters can download that data and inspect their neighborhood or other neighborhoods for voter id irregularities as a function of name or address.  Any such irregularity can be reported to election official.

Note that with all the data and code available to the electorate, alternate facts, illegitimate narratives, or other attempts at casting doubt on the election can eventually be publicly shown to be false.

# 3) Basic Election Official Experience (UX)

At a high level, VOTES brings significant voter transparency to the entire election process.  VOTES directly supports election officials by independently demonstrating to the electorate in a fully transparent manner the provenance of all the election data and processes that effect or touch election data.  This is in terms of both data-at-rest and data-in-movement.

Data here refers to both blank and completed ballots as well as the software that handles both.  Data also refers to the physical paper ballots themselves.

# 3.1) Timeline-based Overview of Services

The next few paragraphs describe the general changes in a more or less chronological manner that election officials will observe when an election is executed via VOTES.

# 3.2) Pre Election Day Summary

Prior to election day, VOTES supports the configuration of a specific election at all the GGO levels (country, state, county, town, other) in parallel.  The blank ballots are developed in an agile manner similar to industry best practices concerning software development and Git.  Changes to the blank ballot or the configuration of the election (contest details, GGO boundaries, etc) are pushed to the GitHub service where an automatic CI/CD pipeline executes the various tests and scans of not just the changes but of the complete VOTES software product.

This development process, quite common in the open software community, includes best-in-class authorization, authentication, and encryption.  As election day approaches VOTES tracks all the changes (versions) to all the ballot questions as well as providing the ability for each precinct to test the election day workflows.

Once a precinct finalizes a ballot, that ballot becomes available for early voting.  Early ballots can be entered into VOTES at any time, including prior, during, or after election day as configured by election configuration.

## 3.3) Day of Election Summary

ZZZ

VOTES directly supports the election day by scanning the paper ballot and tracking voters.  VOTES handles the aggregation of all the ballots via the ballot repo from all the precincts and the aggregation thereof as defined by the GGO's but will not reveal any such aggregated data until after all polls close.  VOTES also handles the publicly available, stripped of any private voter or ballot data, voter id repos.

## 3.4) Post Election-Day Summary

ZZZ

Once the polls close, the VOTES SaaS implementation immediately makes available the complete post election-day  ballot repo.  Note that as precincts make their repos available to VOTES, the VOTES SaaS public version is updated.  As the precincts update their repos in VOTES, VOTES likewise updates the public available repo(s).

The SaaS implementation also makes available the stripped version of the precinct voter id repos.

Importantly, VOTES does __NOT__ provide any actual count or tally of the ballot races/questions - that is determined of the GGO certificate authority and/or the public at large.  Though the GGO will announce the tally, every citizen is capable of executing their own tally and questioning the GGO results.  All citizens can perform the tally since the tally algorithm and the data, as well as the entire provenance of both, is contained in the VOTES ballot repo.

# 4) Basic Technical Overview

Technically VOTES is method to electronically and anonymously record each paper ballot as a hashed-chain of ballots.  The primary compelling reason behind VOTES is the open-source, open-data, nature of the GitHub or the equivalent git technology.  By using a currently well understood and popular enough full ledger distributed storage system (such as git), VOTES inherently provides the transparency needed for public trust for both (blank) ballot creation, ballot scanning, and electronic based software tallying.

By requiring an independent physical ballot and physical paper trail, fully air-gapped from the electronic copy, VOTES minimizes the risk that an undetectable or un-repairable ballot or election compromise occurs.

VOTES also supports a significantly customizable voter [UX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_experience) experience depending on what the state or local election official desire to support or have the monetary resource to support.

While the ballots and tally algorithms are fully open-source with full ledger provenance, the actual implementation of an election is based on significant and currently best-available security and encryption technologies, including but not limited to full [mutual authenticated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual_authentication) ssl, multi-node and independent [public key certificate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_key_certificate) based communication with concurrent [MFA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication) during all workflows during the election process, including pre, day-of, and post election day.  All crucial digests are created via double encryption via two independent certificate authorities, one being the local precinct or state authority responsible for the physical ballots, and the other being the VOTES system/framework.  As such it takes a compromise of two independent certificate authorities as well as access to the original encrypted data to compromise the digests.

And even if the digests are compromised, such a compromise only attacks voter anonymity and does compromise the actual ballot contents nor the tally of the ballots.  Being a fully distributed full ledger of an election, every citizen can maintain their own full ledger copy of the election.  Compromising an election would require compromising a clear weighted majority of the distributed copies of the election.

## 4.1) Implementation Overview

VOTES is implemented via three kinds of git repos:  a public VOTES ballot repo(s), a private VOTES voter-id repo(s), and a public VOTES voter-id repo(s).

The VOTES ballot repo holds the full ledger history of the ballot, ballot tally algorithm, voter UX workflows, and GGO (Geopolitical Geographical Overlay) configurations.  GGO's are how various groups of addresses participate or not regarding a ballot question or race.  Examples of a GGO are: state, city, borough, district, town, precinct, etc.  Each election can have different GGO's depending on many factors. On election day ballots are scanned into this repo.

The VOTES ballot repo(s) start as public.  As the GGO's work to finalize their ballots and tally algorithms and other pre-election data and configuration, the public has access to this repo.  However, once the election itself commences, updates to the VOTES ballot repo are no longer availabe.  It is fully private until after all-polls-close.  At that point the ballot repo is made public again.  As precincts privately upload their data to the VOTES SaaS implementation, those updates are made available live to the general public.

Note that with VOTES precincts are __NOT__ uploading ballot counts with percentage of ballot counted - they are uploading the actual raw VOTES scanned ballots.  The tallies are done by the GGO certificate owners as well as the public at large by downloading (cloning) the ballot repo(s) and performing the tallies.  (The tally algorithms are contained in the repo.)  With VOTES every citizen can perform the tally.

The second VOTES repo is a fully private voter-id repo.  This repo contains only two pieces of voter id data that a state may require - the voter's name and address.  The VOTES voter-id repo only maintains a copy of these two pieces of information regardless of how much data a state or precinct may actually require to positively and accurately identify a voter.  The repo is private to VOTES SaaS implementation and the precinct/state that is managing the election.

The third VOTES repo is a pruned copy of the private, stripped of all voter and ballot digests and information, VOTES voter-id repo.  It is made public along with the VOTES ballot repo once all-polls-close.

The VOTES framework maintains three important encrypted digests that are calculated live during the voting process.

The first digest identifies each unique ballot as printed and made available to a voter.  This digest is __ONLY__ tracking the blank ballot - it does not contain any information regarding how the voter may or may not have filled in the ballot.

The second digest is a double encrypted (via two separate certificate authority private keys) digest associating the VOTES voter-id with the physical ballot.  This digest is stored in the VOTES voter-id repo.  Note that neither the physical ballot nor this repo is publicly available.

The third digest is a double encrypted (via two separate certificate authority private keys) digest associating the VOTES voter-id with the electronic copy of the ballot.  This digest is stored in a private VOTES SaaS based voter-id repos.  The precinct/state VOTES voter-id repo and the SaaS VOTES voter-id repos are similar but contain separate digests.  They are private to each certificate authority.

Note that post all-polls-close, only the VOTES public ballot and voter-id repos are publicly available and that the digests are only in the privately held VOTES voter-id repos.  Every citizen can download (clone) the ballot and public version of the voter-id repo, but only the precinct/state election officials can download/clone the VOTES private voter-id repos.

This allows the public to inspect their personal as well as their precinct's limited voter id data sans digests.

Via the two independent private VOTES voter-id repos, election officials and the VOTES SaaS system can independently compare, but only by doubly decrypting via two independently private keys, one held by the precinct and one held by the VOTES SaaS implementation, the voter-id and the associaited physical or electronic ballot.  (Note - decoding a phiysical ballot is independent and a different decoding then decoding an electronic ballot.)  Importantly, each such decoding is recorded in the repos themselves such that the public and the voter have insight to when a voter-id has been decoded.

# 4.2) What tally algorithms does VOTES support?

VOTES supports any tally algorithm per ballot question/race desired by the election officials.  Since the tally algorithm itself is part of the full ledge history of the VOTES ballot repo, there is full transparency to the counting of the votes and as to what tally algorithm has been chosen (plurality, instant run-off, [etc](https://electology.org/library#104)).

Note that due to the full history/ledger nature of git, all the pertinent details of the election and how to count it is included in the VOTES ballot repo.

# 4.3) How are the actual ballots created in VOTES?

For any given election, there will be an set of GGO's that must or wish to participate in the election.  Each such GGO gets a git repo to compose their ballot questions.  VOTES takes care of the proper integration of the GGOs such that a simple and maximally comprehensible ballot is created for the voter.  Each GGO is at some point delineated by a physical boundary, and it is that boundary that drives the creation of the correct ballot for a given voter given their specific address.

